okay well I'll start with a simple fact
because it's 50 years on
at this moment in this room in some
nearby universes
Hugh Everett is here with us celebrating
um perhaps he's there in that seat
therefore in those universes
Simon is kicking someone else
okay a fact now it's customary to say
how astonishing a fact that is
but that that we that we know of other
universes and can reason about them and
have evidence of their attributes but
actually by this time the only
astonishing thing is that that's
controversial
after all we know
that no single universe theory can
explain even the epr experiment let
alone something like Quantum computation
because
we know that any process hidden
variables or whatever
that accounts for those phenomena must
be exponentially more complex than
everything we see
and
it must also contain many autonomous
streams of information Each of which
describes something resembling the
universe as described the universe as
described by classical physics
but I don't want to address that
controversy today for reasons that I'll
explain except for one aspect
which is just terminological well
actually
it's more than just terminological
whenever I say interpretation I'm going
to mean that with the scare quotes
um I'm not going to refer to Everest
Discovery as an interpretation at least
if I can help it or even as the
interpretation of quantum's theory even
though that's what it is no other is
known
because the term interpretation
has come to have connotations that
misrepresent not just quantum theory but
science in general
for instance
we never speak of
the existence of dinosaurs millions of
years ago as an interpretation of our
best theory of fossils
we say or we claim that it is the
explanation of fossils and what's more
the theory isn't primarily about fossils
it's about dinosaurs
we say that the dinosaurs really were
there even though
there is an Infinity of rival
interpretations
of the same data that make all the same
predictions and yet say that the
dinosaurs weren't there for instance
there's the interpretation that fossils
only come into existence when they are
consciously observed
and
therefore fossils are no olders and
humans so
um they can't be as old as claimed and
what's more they in in that
interpretation they aren't evidence of
dinosaurs they're just evidence of those
acts of observation
or there's the interpretation
that
dinosaurs were such weird animals that
conventional logic doesn't apply to them
or there's the interpretation that it's
meaningless to ask whether dinosaurs
were real or just a useful fiction to
explain fossils none of those
interpretations
is empirically distinguishable from the
rational theory of dinosaurs
but they are ruled out because
all of them are general purpose means of
denying
anything
you could even use them to deny that
quantum theory is true
so insisting that
parallel universes are only an
interpretation and not uh
what a scientifically established Theory
or something as if there were such a
thing
has exactly the same logic as those
stickers that they put in some American
biology textbooks saying that evolution
is just a theory by which they mean
exactly that it's just an interpretation
or in terms of the analogy that Everett
himself used
in his famous exchange of letters with
spice DeWitt it's like claiming that the
motion of the earth is only an
interpretation which we place on our
observations of the sky
now a prime mistake there in all those
interpretations
is to
conceive of scientific therapies as
being composed of separate formalism
predictions and interpretations
because that necessarily makes it look
as though the interpretation
is which then by definition doesn't make
predictions
can't be tested and therefore isn't
scientific and as I've just explained
then interpretations are also infinitely
variable
so a formalism then in that case because
on that view
the content of a scientific theory is
entirely consists of uh its testable
predictions but that is equivalent to
regarding observation
as an irreducible primitive in science
and that is inconsistent with developing
a proper theory of measurement that is
itself scientific so you can't go that
way
and this is one of several reasons why
science can only be in fact be that's
the wrong use
um
science can only be explanation
asserting what is there in reality
for discussion of other reasons that the
science can only be explanation see my
book the fabric of reality
the only purpose of formalism
predictions and interpretation is to
express
explanatory theories in such a way that
they can be efficiently criticized
an explanatory theories have to be about
what is there in reality not just about
human perception that is
intolerably parochial for you
and in that regard all the so-called
interpretations of quantum theory are
either versions of Everett sometimes in
heavy disguise and with heavy
equivocation like like phones Theory
or they claim in effect that no
explanation in my sense of of quantum
phenomena exists that is to say no
objective reality which alone accounts
for the observations on the one hand and
obeys the equations the formalism on the
other
but if you deny there's an objective
reality then yeah you can do that but
then science stops being about anything
apart from your own thoughts
so the idea that science is about
interpreting mathematical formalism is a
horribly misleading which is why I won't
say Everett's interpretation I'll say
Everett's Theory which is quantum theory
and I'll use those terms more or less
interchangeably
okay so much for the terminological
issue now
if Everett were here today
which is another that that's another way
of saying in the universes in whichever
is here today
what would he make of the progress
that has been made
with his theory since his Discovery I
think it's fair to say that averaged
over the whole period
progress was disappointingly slow
however thanks in no small part to some
of the people here today
that rate of progress has been
increasing and I'll come to that in a
moment but first why was progress slow
well a related issue which we usually
discuss at the same time is that K-Cup
of Everest Theory was and continues to
be uh disappointingly slow but I think
that that is an effect not a cause after
all
ten percent one percent of a vigorous
research Community like the theoretical
physics Community is plenty to pursue
any one topic there are plenty of causes
in physics that are pursued by only one
percent of the community and we're in
which progress is made
the real impediment to progress
in understanding quantum physics during
those decades was quite different I
believe
it was
that
well
let me digress for a moment to the
historical speculations
no
that was a bit of hyperbole by by Dennis
Sharma who was my boss when I came to
Oxford as a graduate student I quote
that from memory but she said it several
times in different ways
um
the that phenomenon has been diminishing
but it was once an intense effect
and it's tempting to blame it
but no you can't blame a series
opponents for not developing it
for not getting it
by the way Schrodinger also had the
basic idea of parallel universes
um
shortly before Everett but he didn't
publish it he mentioned it in a lecture
in in Dublin in which he predicted that
the audience would think he was crazy
Now isn't isn't that a strange assertion
coming from a Nobel Prize winner that he
feared being considered crazy for
claiming
that his equation the one that he won
the Nobel Prize for might be true
so Schrodinger and Everett and DeWitt
and Sharma and everyone else who
realized that ever it was right
encounters that perplexing phenomenon
and as a result
they the proponents of Everett's Theory
focused on to the extent that they
worked on it at all
focused on
defending it against criticism of rather
poor quality
initially again it's overtly irrational
predecessor the Copenhagen
interpretation and and also then against
the bone Theory by the way the bone
Theory future historians may regard the
bone Theory as just another of the
predecessors of Everett that didn't
quite get it but almost got there I mean
from you know hundreds of years from now
people won't be able to uh tell much
difference there
boom could easily have anticipated
Everett entirely
if he had
chosen not to equivocate about which of
the things in his theory were real and
which weren't
and then later they were defending
against the other disguises and denials
of quantum theory that were proposed to
for the purpose of escaping from the
playing physics of the theory so
they
we
defended it
but that was no way to solve that
problem in fact there's no way to solve
any problem because defending
a theory against its predecessor is
inherently backward looking
of course some such defenses is
necessary but
the preoccupation with looking backwards
to refute bad theories makes it hard to
move forward with the good one it's as
if
molecular biologists which is spend all
their time refuting creationism
then more sophisticated opponents
arrived with better criticism and
Everett's theory was indeed improved by
meeting that but still even then
that's the kind of progress which is
like putting better tires on your car
what is the point of having better tires
on your car if you're not going to use
it to drive somewhere
so
that I think wasn't the reason
this was the reason
looking backwards instead of forward
that's my my historical speculation and
that has palpably changed but not yet
enough so I want today I want to
Advocate developing the sophisticated
and far-reaching consequences of Everest
Theory rather than endlessly defending
and redefending just the basic idea of
it let's address the many perplexing
problems to which quantum theory gives
us access Each of which presumably
promises new insights into reality
and in most cases it's only ever a
theory that does that because most of
those problems are fatally obscured in
other approaches by their
vagueness and
crudeness and in in in many cases by
their denial that there's anything real
there to theorize about in the first
place
you know
if someone
opposes say realism
or or insists on inherently vague or
equivocal language or or relies on what
Richard Dawkins calls calls the argument
from personal incredulity which by the
way I think you will find in virtually
every critique of Everett and virtually
every defense of it as well
then you can't prove them wrong
but what you can do with a bit of luck
is make progress and I think that most
physicists and philosophers actually
want to understand the world no matter
how loudly they may deny this
so
it's going to be
progress that's difficult or impossible
to achieve in other approaches
that will ultimately be the best and
only possible effective defense of the
rational quantum theory just as progress
in general is the only really effective
defense of reason and of Science in
general so I want to tell you what I
think some of those unsolved problems
are
they're all in one way or another about
what is really out there in reality
apart from universes because
the Multiverse isn't just a collection
of universes
[Applause]
in fact universes the the things that
historically all the fasts nearly all
the fuss about Everett has been about
are really just classical physics and
Ensemble of
classical universes is still classical
even if they slightly interact it's
still classical
it doesn't have entanglement it doesn't
have spaces to its amplitude and it
doesn't have a continuous motion of
discrete observables or quantity doesn't
support quantum computation it doesn't
even represent observables that aren't
close to being diagonal in some
preferred basis
so these are all properties that the
real Multiverse has in addition to
having universes in it and that's not an
exhaustive list
okay so let's start with a
free particle in empty space
you might think that
that at least
is something that happened in each
Universe independently of the other so
that we can forget about the Multiverse
when we're talking about just the three
particle empty empty space but
nothing of the sort is true so first of
all past life can be described by wave
packets thanks to the uncertain
principle which means that as far as the
universes go
it's at different positions in different
universes but then
also
around different universities also
because of the uncertainty principle and
because of the linearity of quantum
mechanics
there is no
no position and also the velocity of
Behaving independently of what is
happening elsewhere in the Multiverse
that means that there are no autonomous
information flows in the sufficiently
fine detail in the Multiverse at all
anywhere so in fine detail even a free
particle is an irreducibly multiversal
object not just a parallel universes
object
furthermore at some later time
the particle will the wave packet will
have changed and the instances of the
particles in the Multiverse would be at
different positions
but none of them individually will have
moved to where it is
that doesn't happen
because there is no such thing as any of
them individually
[Applause]
when the universe approximation breaks
down the autonomy of the instances of a
single particle in the Multiverse breaks
down two they are then fungible
in fact
um
all this is is implicit in the equations
but we lack an explicit
mathematical description of the
multiplayer
at any level lower than that of universe
which is an emergent level as we now all
know
and this is one of the most telling
omissions in my opinion
corroborating my historical speculations
um from Multiverse research so far no
one has yet done the Spade work to
construct a mathematical description of
what the Multiverse even is
to fill in that Gap
in general relativity for instance
Einstein's field equations are
understood to apply to a physical object
space time which has a non-trivial
structure it's got a geometry and
topology and
singularities all of which took a lot of
careful mathematical theoretical
thinking to discover and to express
whatever possesses people to think that
for instance quantum gravity can be
cracked before we've developed a similar
understanding of the Multiverse of
quantum theory
so where should we look for that
understanding well even in general
relativity much of the theory of
space-time
is the theory of information flow
the Laurentian metric
event Horizons koshy surfaces causality
conditions
and so on and at the more basic level
there's just the plain
relativity of simultaneity as well
in the structure of the Multiverse we
have good reason to believe that
information flow
is even more important so it might even
be the whole Theory and it's studied in
the quantum theory of computation so
that's a good place to look in in fact
that's a good place to look for most
important things and I've found
so at the crudest level
Quantum computation is just Quantum
parallelism many classical computations
in parallel which is the parallel
universe approximation
but we need to do a lot better than that
we know
that the physical attributes of systems
determine whether and how
they can be used for information
processing to do Turing computations you
need discrete observables that can
interact in various ways you need stable
information storage
The Next Step say the quantum
cryptography requires certain operations
on qubits rather than bits but only
individual ones to build general Quantum
Gates you need to be able to do more and
for Universal Quantum computation you
need to be able to do even more such as
error correction
and then it stops then we have something
that is universal
so different kinds of information
processing are possible in different
kinds of Multiverse regions
so the understanding that's currently
being developed about these different
kinds of computational resource is
telling us about the structure of the
Multiverse
and many of the people doing it don't
even know that
but the sophistication of these new
results about computation
contra very sharply with the Woolly and
archaic explanations that still
accompany them in in quantum
teleportation for instance we are still
routinely told that information passes
from A to B without passing through the
space in between
or that it travels backwards in time to
the source of the entanglement and then
forwards again
to its destination or that it jumps
instantaneously across the Gap whatever
that means and so on
again there's no substance
accompanying any of those descriptions
no mathematical object that is even
purported to represent those alleged
weird processes of jumping and so on
Only The observed outcomes are described
mathematically because again the quantum
formalism is being used purely
instrumentally together with the same
old single universe
apologetics
the only way of understanding what's
really happening in quantum
teleportation and in the newly
discovered important processes of
cluster or graph Quantum computation is
to apply evidence Theory Patrick Hayden
and I analyzed information flow in
general in tangle systems using quantum
theory of computation and showed that
there's Quantum information inside the
coherent observable
now there's no way even to express that
fact other than in Everett's Theory
because it means that there is no
classical level even physical variables
such as those in an observer's brain
which behave autonomously in each
universe
also carry this hidden information
that's not confined to universities and
which can later participate in quantum
computations
by the way in that work we use the
Heisenberg picture which I don't have
time to go into today but suffice it to
say that working in the Heisenberg
picture is the key to eliminating 50 of
all misconceptions in quantum theory
including ones about non-locality in in
things like quantum computer quantum
teleportation
okay now there's a there's a related and
even worse spanner in the works
of
elementary particle physics
turn yourself up dead
particles
or strings or whatever are supposed to
be fully quantum mechanical entities in
nature but the people who work on them
only ever construct
classical single Universe theories why
because they think that the quantum part
of the theory by definition has to be
trivial
it's assumed that in order to discover
the true quantum mechanical equations of
the world
you have to enact a certain ritual first
you have to invent a theory that you
know to be false using a traditional
formalism and laws that were refuted
almost a century ago in some senses more
than a century ago then you subject this
Theory to a formal process known as
quantization which for these purposes
includes renormalization and that's
supposed to be a quantum theory a
classical goes in a sort of packed on
Quantum shell
in other words the true explanation of
the world is supposed to be obtained by
a mechanical transformation of a false
Theory without any additional
explanation being added
that is close to being magical thinking
how far could Newtonian physics have
been developed if everyone had taken for
granted that there has to be a ghost of
Kepler in every Newtonian theory of
anything that the only valid solutions
to newton-type equations were those
based on conic sections because that's
what Kepler had
and
because the early successes of Newton's
Theory also had them just as the
quantization recipe did successfully
discover new new Quantum systems what
three times four times
so it was worth worth trying for one or
two more times as a heuristic
lots of things are worth trying
theory was worth trying
um but there's no there was no
justification for relying exclusively on
nature being this classical ghost in a
Quantum shell and I think it's not a
coincidence that the Decades of not
taking seriously what quantum theory
says in its own right
by following up on Everett was also the
time when discoveries of new kinds of
quantum systems frustratingly slowed
down as well
but it's surely a mistake
to stick to the historical single
Universe world view even while using
quantum mechanical equations we should
be seeking explanations not in the
confines of one space time or even
multiple space times but in the
Multiverse
such theories are possible I I even
constructed one a while ago for
unrelated reasons called cubits field
Theory
anyway another another problem
is the nature of time now in 1982 Don
Page and Bill rooters discovered that
times
are ever inverses they were addressing
again an apparently unrelated
theoretical problem namely
since total energy is conserved how can
we tell that the world isn't in an eigen
state of it
and they discovered that we can't tell
we can assume without loss of generality
that the world is in an eigenstate of
its hamiltonian a stationary state
but then
what's all this motion that we see
well by analyzing closed physical
systems that included clocks
they showed that motion is an
entanglement effect clock states are
correlated with states of other systems
this important result
should be the basis of everyone's
conception of time yet it has barely and
rarely been taken on board Julian
Barbers a very honorable exception to
that
um
why not because again this is an issue
that one can address and solve and
understand only in Everett's Theory
all other approaches just command us to
talk nonsense or
assume a classical conception of time by
Fiat or if they're being consistent they
would say that the present is the only
real time and the rest are just
possibilities
I should also mention
time travel I think that more work needs
to be done on information flow around
close time like curves because even if
it turns out that we have to rule those
out
how can we do that without understanding
what causality means in the Multiverse
and one thing we do know is that it
means something different to what it
means in space-time
then there's the arrow of time or arrows
of time uh entropy is a kind of measure
of the branchingness of the Multiverse
and the so-called subjective or
knowledge Arrow of time
is also related to Multiverse structure
because
knowledge is associated with complexity
that extends over a multiversal region
so it seems likely that the entropy and
knowledge areas of time are connected
via the structure of the Multiverse
that's another potential Avenue of
progress that's open only in Everett
Theory or nearly only
right one of the successes along the
lines and advocating that has already
been achieved
is in the understanding of probability
that is
answering that question
with that Rider
others at this conference have already
discussed and no doubt we'll discuss
more that work but what I want to stress
now is that
every Theory provided the solution to a
philosophical puzzle that people had
worried about quite independently of
quantum theory
it's a problem it's a bit like deriving
an all from an is deriving a tends to
from a dove so like you try to explain
what a probability statement means like
that that heads will probably come up
about half the time when you toss coins
what does that mean well you find
yourself reducing it just to other
probability statements like that if you
bet on some other proportion than 50 50
you're likely to lose but then what's
likely
it seems that you can never reduce it to
so and so will happen and so people
historically have been reduced to
talking nonsense about this like for
instance the frequency or Ensemble
interpretations of probability they say
that something is probable if it would
happen in the majority of cases if an
experiment were repeated infinitely many
times but then it's not talking about
realities it's a real experiment aren't
performed infinitely many times and even
if they were we want to know what to do
on particular occasions
and in any case the frequency
interpretation whether with an infinite
number of instances or a finite number
of instances logically doesn't reproduce
probabilities unless the instances are
equally likely so you get a circular
definition of likely
or people have tried to say that
probability is a measure of subjective
belief but then you have to explain why
my subjective belief about a coin is a
property of the coin rather than of me
and the answer has to be there's not
just any old belief it's the belief that
you should have if you're rational but
then why should a rational person have
that subjective belief because if you're
if you're just some other belief you're
likely to bet on the wrong things but
what does likely mean so there's
circularity again and David Papineau
once called this state of affairs at the
foundations of probability Theory a
scandal
well as I said I think it's been solved
Everett Theory which is a completely
deterministic theory of a Multiverse
without stochastic processes
determines what is rational behavior for
observers who bifurcate in the
Multiverse consequently anyone who sets
out to deny Everett now has the
embarrassing problem that the philosophy
of probability is a scandal without it
I know that some people here disagree
but
for some people here agree which goes to
illustrate
of seeking progress instead of ever more
devastating demolitions of what were
always bad ideas in the first place
however there do still exist some
outstanding and promising problems in
regard to probability because there's
more to probability than just decision
making when observed a cycle cake
there are also important situations
where an observer only exists in some
regions of the Multiverse and not in
others
one example is anthropic principle
arguments where people try to explain
the values of observed quantities by
calculating their expectation values
given that someone asks what the value
should be
in particular they're usually concerned
with ensembles of universes with
different sets of laws of physics and we
exist in some of them and not in others
and so we can make predictions but one
problem that arises is who is we
this isn't just the problem of personal
identity in the philosophy of mind
though that too is an issue that one
can't hope to understand without the
full Quantum context as Michael Lockwood
and others have have pointed out
for instance the universe may be
spatially infinite
in which case again there may be
infinitely many instances of the whole
universe that's observable from that's
observable from here
and if we identify all identical
instances of ourselves as being the same
person which surely we have to do if we
are physicalists then should we not also
be identifying identical observable
universes across space as being the same
universe but in that case space would
really be finite after all even in the
cosmologies
which are where space is infinite in the
classical general relativity
approximation
okay then there's the so-called Quantum
suicide arguments to the effect that if
you want to win the lottery all you have
to do is buy yourself a ticket and set
up a machine that will kill you
automatically in your sleep if you lose
and then in the universities in which
you do wake up
uh in which you exist to make the
observation at all you're bound to be a
winner
and then there are various types of
what's called a simulation Arguments for
instance by Nick Bostrom such as the in
the distant future the whole universe as
we know it is is going to be simulated
in computers many times and therefore
the overwhelming majority of instances
of whatever we have observed will be
observed in those simulations and
therefore we've probably are in one of
them so the argument goes now at present
little if any progress can be made in
any of those controversies
ingenious arguments have been derived
for all of them but at present they all
ultimately reduced to hand waving
because at the root of all of them there
is some assumption about probability and
all of them are guilty
of using the frequency interpretation or
the subjective belief interpretation or
both
and they are therefore all in a state of
sin at present
what is needed is to express any such
argument in the framework of a theory of
a Multiverse sometimes it has to be a a
bigger Multiverse than the Multiverse of
Everest and then one has to derive the
premises of one's argument from laws of
physics purported laws of physics as
ever it did one has to determine then
as was done with the Everett Multiverse
whether the theory that theory forces a
unique meaning on the numbers that those
arguments want to regard as probability
a unique meaning such that those numbers
can be used to make predictions and
place rational bets and and infer make
Bayesian arguments about inference about
the state of the universe and so on
and all the other universities with
probability and if it doesn't
force that then no progress can be made
with it and the argument in question
isn't really valid
isn't really scientific
my guess is that when that's done we'll
find that the quantum suicide argument
and the most versions of the simulation
argument are actually invalid
and the anthropic principle arguments I
suspect are actually right as far as
they go but insufficient in themselves
to explain anything
but that's my opinion
just hand waving hand waving as I said
can't resolve those issues only future
development in Multiverse Theory can
okay so here's a quick summary
of the open problems that I've mentioned
really just look at the length and
diversity of that rather than the
content every series pretty far-reaching
that's the point I'm trying to make and
this is just the tip of the iceberg I'm
sure because quantum theory is deeper
much deeper than all the other theories
in physics that are considered to be
fundamental so the implication of that
for physicists
is
well we've got to understand this thing
the Multiverse because otherwise in
every fundamental branch of physics
it's as if we were planning an
expedition to the Moon while still
thinking that the Earth is flat
we may not go wrong but we probably will
and we probably won't have the
wherewithals to to proceed
to philosophers the implication is
some of our basic intuitions about the
physical world are plain wrong not just
in regards to how many universes there
are as I said that is the least of it
that's just classical
it's what is there apart from the
universe
and hence since philosophy is about
understanding things like
probability and time and and the nature
of existence and non-existence and the
self and and causation and laws of
nature and the relationship of
mathematics to physical reality
for all of those for any of those you've
got to understand the Multiverse first
learn to think in terms of it build on
that understanding leave behind the
older misconceptions
and the older conceptions of the
Multiverse and apply that to learning
about everything else and discover its
successor
as I said there are people here
already doing those things but to the
rest of you and to the to the physics
and philosophy communities at Large
don't let it be another 50 years before
you two becomes serious about building
on Everett's Theory
thanks
okay well we've got about three minutes
of the 45 minutes for questions that we
may go a little over that so
um let's
uh and certainly very much with you that
everybody by far the best interpretation
is correct and it's a miracle life not
understandable till now but then
think why I think some of the things
excuse me to say that you may be someone
responsible I think the first one should
be to say this is many words and to put
them that are really separate and it
looks like your Multiverse which before
I thought this can live with little
things look that you consider like
multiversity theory about Multiverse and
I think Everest means and special
whether English what he went through
it's a single physical Universe I don't
think the Multiverse it's not a theory
it's multiple the whole the main
important thing there's now this
collapse and this is the main point I
agree with that yes yes
and the other thing which is you've made
big contributions which put it forward
but you also this ask things if you
believe this can be achieved which might
be not and yeah I think Everett was the
first to say that you can get the
probability out of the many world if you
didn't say so I think now it will be
accepted because this was not proven at
least at this time it's not probably not
into this and 201 shows that this
doesn't work they keep the whole Theory
but because the main thing there is no
collapse and not contradict our
experience this is ever theory if you
would not have some other things which
may be not achievable then it will be
acceptable okay
um
first the two things there uh first of
all the
um
I think what you say about Universe
Multiverse I don't care about the
terminology I'm quite happy to call the
multiversal universe and the universal
branch in fact I did that in one paper
it uh I don't care that certainly the
point of Everett's theory is that we
don't need collapse and that the quantum
theory can be regarded as a complete
theory of the universe
as a probability
I agree with you that
the the objection to Everett that it
didn't describe probability properly was
always a mistake what was happening
there was that there is a there is a
problem at the foundations of
probability Theory which was obscured by
silly interpretations
but in Everest interpretation you could
actually see that problem it wasn't a
problem with Everett's interpretation
it's something that you could see
through Everett's interpretation and
then we believe
solve if we haven't solved it it would
be no
um arguments against Everett
David
you have to in faith classical
approximation classical massive stuff
they can break down it seems to me
that'd be the case it's a retrograde
move to describe that thing as most
vertical in the sense of describing it
as living in different Universities at
different points those sort of position
bases I can stay
are there in the hospital it's by all
means about calling them the universes
um
doesn't seem to need to be necessarily
that helpful I mean there's nothing
autonomous then after that sort of thing
they're just those things I entirely
agree and if only we had a proper
mathematical description as a Multiverse
then I'd be very happy to say what's
actually happening with a single
particle is so and so and you you can
see that you can't then make the
universe approximation and have it be
accurate because yeah I agree
standing
is it mathematical is it
it's about when it's
um there's a mathematical issue and uh
or you know mathematical physics issue
and also a philosophical issue the
mathematical physics issue is that we
don't know
what mathematical object the equations
of quantum theory are supposed to apply
to we know how to get answers out of
them and we know
um how to describe something about the
this object in the in emergent
approximation but we don't have a an
exact theory of it we don't have a
theory that's in principle exact
but for instance in that work that I did
on on uh time travel with going back in
time and coming back into different
Universe I have a a diagram there where
one where there's a space time and the
the loop in space time gets unfolded
into a uh I don't know if any of you is
familiar with that word but anyway the
point is that that manifold which is a
sort of hybrid conception of
a relativity thing with a Quantum thing
doesn't doesn't there's no mathematical
object that I can say that that's an
approximation to they're all to be
and in the philosophical so that's the
mathematical physics part of it I think
we need that in order to make progress
in certain directions there's also a
philosophical thing that we don't have a
vocabulary and a language we have a
vocabulary to talk about
um
uh situations where an observable is
sharp and we have uh vocabulary to talk
about uh parallel universes but most of
the Multiverse isn't like that and we
don't have a good way of talking about
what that is like even in the case of a
single particle so um
so those are the two things that are
lacking
I think we should get underway by just
after five two there are three other
people who wanted to ask questions James
Mia and uh Julian so James
um quickly I I thought you overstated
the argument against anti-realism and
also that you ran together to to speak
things so uh and as you read this about
fine sometimes of nine if there's any
objective realities ages just deny that
we're finding out enough so you
shouldn't run those things together
because obviously you know
if you think it's a wonderful Theory use
it every day predict lots of stuff with
it don't believe that they're really old
Italian national existence forces that's
not a crazy view to part of of the world
so
someone who thinks about Quantum who
might think about quantum mechanics just
like that thing I think it's a good
theory to use but I don't see why I
shouldn't believe it to be telling me
the truth about unjust okay
um
first of all I'm glad you're not an
Android list because it's very hard to
argue with someone who denies that they
exist
so
um about the the whether I whether I was
too hard on anti-realism all I said
about it was that you say it could be
that there is a reality but that science
doesn't have access to it all I said
about it was that if you take that view
then science isn't about anything apart
from your own mind and I think that
would be true of a person who took the
view that you outlined as well so that
that's uh now as the explanation the
trouble is if you regard a theory as
being purely a set of observable
predictions then you you must logically
be thinking of
observations as
unanalyzable primitive things and that
is incompatible with having universal
scientific theory also there's the fact
that explanation there are infinitely
many interpretations of those things
which make different predictions for the
future and then you'll run into the
problem of uh induction and so on uh
I think well I have to refer you to the
fabric of reality for why science has to
be explanatory
[Music]
sorry I wasn't asked that yeah and many
people
uh seeing that the organization of the
born rule is not very solely on
rationality
but we do have some functions with your
which which would be which first of all
are not for us with decisions rational
decisions
and second
it may not be even it might even
not possible to justify this attention
[Music]
well at the moment all I can say I I I
think they are and Justified but all I
can say about that at the moment is is
same as my reply to Lev's question if it
turns out that there is a hidden
assumption there and we have to admit
that there has been there have been
okay
if if this really is an assumption over
and above rationality then it's no
argument against Everett's Theory it's
simply it says that there is a remaining
puzzle about what probability really is
and I say we have to admit that all
previous attempts for whatever it is
three three hundred years to solve this
problem of deriving attends to from a
does have contained hidden assumptions
and uh it could be that we're wrong as
well we're not
sure
if you've completely persuaded me that
the sense of task is defined the
Multiverse what it is like would you
agree with me in in poterian lines
that's ultimately someone's got a
conjecture what it's like and then we've
got it absolutely I I did entirely with
what you said that about that yesterday
yes yes uh it's got to be they've got a
conjecture
an explanation that is an assertion
about what the reality is like observed
and unobserved and then that has to be
tested as a follow-up to that there is
an argument for saying that science
actually progresses in small steps so I
wouldn't be quite so quick in in saying
uh dismissing the ghosts within the
thing because that's really actually
like this with the ghost within the
classical goes within the quantum
it's a bit disliking not making a giant
Leaf rather than a series of small leads
and and to some extent I had made a
conjecture about a lot of Multiverse is
like I think it's probably almost
certain it's too naive it will be wrong
but that is it's essentially what
Horizon with conjected 40 years ago
so I wouldn't totally dismiss that as a
responsibility I said it was worth
trying heuristically and it has been
tried but it seems to be running out of
steam
um so there seems to be an obvious
explanation for why it's running out of
steam
okay I think we should draw this part of
the session to close and thank David
again